---
layout: post
title: Existential types are not raw types

meta:
  nav: blog
  author: S11001001
  pygments: true
---

*While this blog is typically strictly for Scala developers interested
in strongly-typed programming, this particular article is of interest
to Java developers as well.  You don’t need to know Scala to follow
along.*

Scala makes a *welcome* simplification in its type system:
[type arguments](http://docs.scala-lang.org/tutorials/tour/generic-classes.html)
are always required.  That is, in Java, you may (unsafely) leave off
the type arguments for compatibility with pre-1.5 code,
e.g. `java.util.List`, forming a
[*raw type*](http://docs.oracle.com/javase/tutorial/java/generics/rawTypes.html).
Scala does not permit this, and requires you to pass a type argument.

The most frequent trouble people have with this rule is being unable
to implement some Java method with missing type arguments in its
signature, e.g. one that takes a raw `List` as an argument.  Let us
see why they have trouble, and why this is a good thing.

Existentials are safe, raw types are not
----------------------------------------

Stripping the type argument list, e.g. going from
`java.util.List<String>` to `java.util.List` is *an unsafe cast*.
[*Wildcarding*](http://docs.oracle.com/javase/tutorial/extra/generics/wildcards.html)
the same type argument, e.g. going from `java.util.List<String>` to
`java.util.List<?>`, is *safe*.  The latter type is written
`java.util.List[_]`, or `java.util.List[T] forSome {type T}`, in
Scala.  In both Java and Scala, this is an
[existential type](http://www.artima.com/pins1ed/combining-scala-and-java.html#29.3).
As compiled with `-Xlint:rawtypes -Xlint:unchecked`:

```java
import java.util.Arrays;
import java.util.ArrayList;
import java.util.List;

public abstract class TestEx {
    public static List<String> words() {
        return new ArrayList<>(Arrays.asList("hi", "there"));
    }

    // TestEx.java:17: warning: [rawtypes] found raw type: List
    //  missing type arguments for generic class List<E>
    //  where E is a type-variable:
    //    E extends Object declared in interface List
    //                  ↓
    public static final List wordsRaw = words();

    // there is no warning for this
    public static final List<?> wordsET = words();
}
```

Also note that there is no warning for the equivalent to `wordsET` in
Scala.  Because it, like javac, knows that it’s safe.

```scala
scala> TestEx.words
res0: java.util.List[String] = [hi, there]

scala> val wordsET = TestEx.words : java.util.List[_]
wordsET: java.util.List[_] = [hi, there]
```

Raw Types are bad.  Stop using them
-----------------------------------

The reason that existentials are safe is that the rules in place for
values of existential type are consistent with the rest of the generic
system, whereas raw types contradict those rules, resulting in code
that should not typecheck, and only does for legacy code support.  We
can see this in action with two Java methods.

```java
public static void addThing(final List xs) {
    xs.add(42);
}

public static void swapAround(final List<?> xs) {
    xs.add(84);
}
```

These methods are the same, except for the use of raw types versus
existentials.  However, the second does not compile:

```
TestEx.java:26: error: no suitable method found for add(int)
        xs.add(84);
          ^
    method Collection.add(CAP#1) is not applicable
      (argument mismatch; int cannot be converted to CAP#1)
    method List.add(CAP#1) is not applicable
      (argument mismatch; int cannot be converted to CAP#1)
  where CAP#1 is a fresh type-variable:
    CAP#1 extends Object from capture of ?
```

Why forbid adding 42 to the list?  The element type of list is
unknown.  The answer lies in that statement: *its unknownness isn’t a
freedom for the body of the method, it’s a restriction*.  The rawtype
version treats its lack of knowledge as a freedom, and the caller pays
for it by having its data mangled.

```java
public static void testIt() {
    final List<String> someWords = words();
    addThing(someWords);
    System.out.println("Contents of someWords after addThing:");
    System.out.println(someWords);
    System.out.println("Well that seems okay, what's the last element?");
    System.out.println(someWords.get(someWords.size() - 1));
}
```

And it compiles:

```
TestEx.java:23: warning: [unchecked] unchecked call to add(E) as a
                         member of the raw type List
        xs.add(42);
              ^
  where E is a type-variable:
    E extends Object declared in interface List
```

But when we try to run it:

```scala
scala> TestEx.testIt()
Contents of someWords after addThing:
[hi, there, 42]
Well that seems okay, what's the last element?
java.lang.ClassCastException: java.lang.Integer cannot be cast to
                              java.lang.String
  at rawtypes.TestEx.testIt(TestEx.java:32)
  ... 43 elided
```

It is a mistake to think that just because some code throws
`ClassCastException`, it must be to blame for a type error.  This line
is blameless.  It is the fault of the unchecked cast when we called
`addThing`, and more specifically, the unsafe assumption about the
`List`’s element type that was made in its body.

Existentials are much better
----------------------------

When we used the wildcard, we were forbidden from doing the unsafe
thing.  But what kinds of things can we do with the safe, existential
form?  Here’s one:

```java
private static <E> void swapAroundAux(final List<E> xs) {
    xs.add(xs.get(0));
}

public static void swapAround(final List<?> xs) {
    swapAroundAux(xs);
}
```

In other words: let `E` be the *unknown* element type of `xs`.
`xs.get()` has type `E`, and `xs.add` has argument type `E`.  They
line up, so this is okay, no matter what the element type of `xs`
turns out to be.  Let’s try a test:

```scala
scala> val w = TestEx.words
w: java.util.List[String] = [hi, there]

scala> TestEx.swapAround(w)

scala> w.get(w.size - 1)
res1: String = hi
```

The body of `swapAround` is guaranteed not to mangle its argument by
the type checker, so we, as a caller, can safely call it, and know
that our argument’s type integrity is protected.

Scala has more features to let us get away without `swapAroundAux`.
This translation uses a lowercase
[*type variable pattern*](http://www.scala-lang.org/files/archive/spec/2.11/08-pattern-matching.html#type-parameter-inference-for-constructor-patterns.)
to name the existential.  To the right of the `=>`, we can declare
variables of type `e` and use `e` to construct more types, while still
referring to the `_` in the `xs` argument’s type.  But in this case,
we just do the same as `swapAroundAux` above.

```scala
def swapAround(xs: java.util.List[_]): Unit =
  xs match {
    case xs2: java.util.List[e] => xs2.add(xs2.get(0))
  }
```

Crushing the existential
------------------------

Let’s consider the `xs.get()` and `xs.add` methods, which have return
type and argument type `E`, respectively.  As you can’t write the name
of an existential type in Java, what happens when we “crush” it,
choosing the closest safe type we can write the name of?

First, we can simplify by considering every existential to be bounded.
That is, instead of `E`, we think about `E extends Object super
Nothing`, or `E <: Any >: Nothing` in Scala.  While `Object` or `Any`
is the “top” of the type hierarchy, which *every* type is a subtype
of, `Nothing` is the “bottom”, sadly left out of Java’s type system,
which *every* type is a *supertype* of.

For `get`, the `E` appears in the result type, a *covariant* position.
So we crush it to the upper bound, `Any`.

```scala
scala> wordsET.get _
res2: Int => Any = <function1>
```

However, for `add`, the `E` appears in the argument type, a
*contravariant* position.  So if it is to be crushed, it must be
crushed to the lower bound, `Nothing`, instead.

```scala
scala> (wordsET: java.util.Collection[_]).add _ : (Any => Boolean)
<console>:12: error: type mismatch;
 found   : _$1 => Boolean where type _$1
 required: Any => Boolean
              (wordsET: java.util.Collection[_]).add _ : (Any => Boolean)
                                                 ^
scala> (wordsET: java.util.Collection[_]).add _ : (Nothing => Boolean)
res8: Nothing => Boolean = <function1>
```

Each occurrence of an existential in a signature may be crushed
independently.  However, a variable that appears once but may be
distributed to either side, such as in a generic type parameter, is
*invariant*, and may not be crushed at that point.  That is why the
existential is preserved in the inferred type of `wordsET` itself.

```scala
scala> wordsET
res9: java.util.List[_] = [hi, there]
```

Herein lies something closer to a formalization of the problem with
raw types: they crush existential occurrences in contravariant and
invariant positions to the upper bound, `Object`, when the only safe
positions to crush in this way are the covariant positions.

How do `List` and `List<?>` relate?
-----------------------------------

It is well understood that, in Java, `List<String>` is not a subtype
of `List<Object>`.  In Scala terms, this is because all type
parameters are *invariant*, which has exactly the meaning it had in
the previous section.  However, that doesn’t mean it’s impossible to
draw subtyping relationships between different `List`s for different
type arguments; they must merely be mediated by existentials, as is
common in the Java standard library.

The basic technique is as follows: we can convert any `T` in `List<T>`
to `? extends T super T`.  Following that, we can raise the argument
to `extends` and lower the argument to `super` as we like.  A `?` by
itself, I have described above, is merely the most extreme course of
this formula you can take.  So `List<T>` for any `T` is a subtype of
`List<?>`.  (This only applies at one level of depth;
e.g. `List<List<T>>` is not necessarily a subtype of `List<List<?>>`.)

Does this mean that `List` is a subtype of `List<?>`?  Well, kind of.
Following the rule for specialization of method signatures in
subclasses, we should be able to override a method that returns
`List<?>` with one that returns `List`, and override a method that
takes `List` as an argument with one that takes `List<?>` as an
argument.  However, this is like building a house on a foam mattress:
the conversion that got us a raw type wasn’t sound in the first place,
so what soundness value does this relationship have?

The frequent Java library bug
-----------------------------

Let’s see the specific problem that people usually encounter in Scala.
Suppose `addThing`, defined above, is an instance member of `TestEx`:

```java
class TestEx2 extends TestEx {
    @Override
    public void addThing(final List<?> xs) {}
}
```

Or the Scala version:

```scala
class TestEx3 extends TestEx {
  override def addThing(xs: java.util.List[_]): Unit = ()
}
```

`javac` gives us this error:

```
TestEx.java:48: error: name clash: addThing(List<?>) in TestEx2 and
                addThing(List) in TestEx have the same erasure, yet
                neither overrides the other
    public void addThing(final List<?> xs) {}
                ^
TestEx.java:47: error: method does not override or implement a method
                from a supertype
    @Override
    ^
```

scalac is forgiving, though.  I’m not sure how forgiving it is.
However, the forgiveness is unsound: it lets us return less specific
types when overriding methods than we got out.

How to fix it
-------------

1. Stop using raw types.

2. **If you maintain a Java library with raw types in its API, you are
   doing a disservice to your users.  Eliminate them.**

3. If you are using such a library, report a bug, or submit a patch,
   to eliminate the raw types.  If you add `-Xlint:rawtypes` to the
   `javac` options, the compiler will tell you where you’re using
   them.  Fix all the warnings, and you’re definitely not using raw
   types anymore.

4. Help Java projects, including your own, avoid introducing raw types
   by adding `-Xlint:rawtypes` permanently to their `javac` options.
   **`rawtypes` is more serious than `unchecked`**; even if you do not
   care about `unchecked` warnings, you should still turn on and fix
   `rawtypes` warnings.

You may also turn on `-Xlint:cast` to point out casts that are no
longer necessary now that your types are cleaner.  If possible, add
`-Werror` to your build as well, to convert `rawtypes` warnings to
errors.

Why not just add wildcards automatically?
-----------------------------------------

Adding wildcards isn’t a panacea.  For certain raw types, you need to
add a proper type parameter, even adding type parameters to your own
API.  The Internet has no copy and paste solutions to offer you; it
all depends on how to model your specific scenario.  Here are a few
possibilities.

1. Pass a type argument representing what’s actually in the structure.
   For example, replace `List` with `List<String>` if that’s what it
   is.

2. Pass a wildcard.

3. Propagate the type argument outward.  For example, if you have a
   method `List doThis(final List xs)`, maybe it should be `<E>
   List<E> doThis(final List<E> xs)`.  Or if you have a `class
   Blah<X>` containing a `List`, maybe it should be a `class Blah<A,
   X>` containing a `List<A>`.  This is often the most flexible
   option, but it can take time to implement.

4. Combine any of these.  For example, in some circumstances, a more
   flexible version of #3 would be to define `Blah<A, X>` containing a
   `List<? extends A>`.

Wildcards and existentials are historically misunderstood in the Java
community; Scala developers have the advantage of more powerful
language tools for talking about them.  So **if you are unsure of how
to eliminate some raw types, consider asking a Scala developer what to
do!** Perhaps they will tell you “use Scala instead”, and maybe that’s
worth considering, but you’re likely to get helpful advice regardless
of how you feel about language advocacy.

The Scala philosophy
--------------------

As you can see, the Java compatibility story in Scala is not as simple
as is advertised.  However, I favor the strong stance against this
unsound legacy feature.  If Scala can bring an end to the scourge of
raw types, it will have been worth the compatibility trouble.

*This article was tested with Scala 2.11.5 and javac 1.8.0_31.*
